Random forest algorithm is being used for the stock market prediction. Since it has been termed as one of the easiest to use and flexible machine learning algorithm, it gives good accuracy in the prediction. This is usually used in the classification tasks. Because of the high volatility in the stock market, the task of predicting is quite challenging. In stock market prediction we are using random forest classifier which has the same hyperparameters as of a decision tree.The decision tool has a model similar to that of a tree. It takes the decision based on possible consequences, which includes variables like event outcome, resource cost, and utility. The random forest algorithm represents an algorithm where it randomly selects different observations and features to build several decisiontree and then takes the aggregate of the several decision trees outcomes. The data is split into partitions based on the questions on a label or an attribute. The data set we used was from the previous year‟s stock markets collected from the public database available online, 80 % of data was used to train the machine and the rest 20 % to test the data. The basic approach of the supervised learning model is to learn the patterns and relationships in the data from the training set and then reproduce them for the test data.

Classification is an instance of supervised learning where a set is analyzed and categorized based on a common attribute. From the values or the data are given, classification draws some conclusion from the observed value. If more than one input is given then classification will try to predict one or more outcomes for the same. A few classifiers that are used here for the stock market prediction includes the random forest classifier, SVM classifier.
Random Forest Classifier
Random forest classifier is a type of ensemble classifier and also a supervised algorithm. It basically creates a set of decision trees, that yields some result. The basic approach of random class classifier is to take the decisionaggregate of random subset decision tress and yield a final class or result based on the votes of the random subset of decision trees.
Parameters
The parameters included in the random forest classifier are n_estimators which is total number of decision trees, and other hyper parameters like oob-score to determine the generalization accuracy of the random forest, max_features which includes the number of features for best-split. min_weight_fraction_leaf is the minimum weighted fraction of the sum total of weights of all the input samples required to be at a leaf node. Samples have equal weight when sample weight is not provided.

The main task of the support machine algorithm is to identify an N-dimensional space that distinguishably categorizes the data points. Here, N stands for a number of features. Between two classes of data points, there can be multiple possible hyperplanes that can be chosen. The objective of this algorithm is to find a plane that has maximum margin. Maximizing margin refers to the distance between data points of both classes. The benefit associated with maximizing the margin is that it provides is that it provides some reinforcement so that future data points can be more easily classified. Decision boundaries that help classify data points are called hyperplanes. Based on the position of the data points relative to the hyperplane they are attributed to different classes. The dimension of the hyperplane relies on the number of attributes, if the number of attributes is two then the hyperplane is just a line, if the number of attributes is three then the hyperplane is two dimensional.